<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plague. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Brandes: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Kritiker og Portraiter</i>. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">E.g.</abbr> In “Ole Luköe,” “<i xml:lang="da">der gjorde cour til</i>” is translated “who <em>cured</em>,” instead of “who <em>courted</em>.” The word <i xml:lang="fr">cour</i> might have suggested that this was one of Andersen’s frequent Gallicisms, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “<i xml:lang="fr">faisait la cour à.</i>” <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first printer and publisher in Denmark, under King Hans. <a href="the-goloshes-of-fortune.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Opposite to the grave of Galileo is the tomb of Michelangelo. His bust stands upon it, with three figures, representing sculpture, painting, and architecture. Close by is a monument to Dante, whose body is buried at Ravenna. On this monument Italy is represented pointing to the colossal statue of Dante, while poetry weeps over his loss. A few steps farther is Alfieri’s monument, which is adorned with laurel, the lyre, and the dramatic masks: Italy weeps over his grave. Machiavelli is the last in the list of these celebrated men. <a href="the-metal-pig.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to a superstition among the Greeks, this is a monster produced from the unopened entrails of slaughtered sheep, which had been thrown away in the fields. <a href="the-sheperds-story-of-the-bond-of-friendship.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A peasant who can read is often made a priest; he is addressed as “Most holy sir,” and the other peasants kiss the ground on which he has stepped. <a href="the-sheperds-story-of-the-bond-of-friendship.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Children have a kind of language, or gibberish, which is sometimes called “crow’s language”; it is formed by adding letters or syllables to every word. <a href="the-snow-queen.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Danish arms consist of three lions between nine hearts. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This highly-gifted princess was the wife of Corfitz Ulfeld; he was accused of high treason, and Eleanor, whose only fault was the truest love to her unhappy husband, was compelled to remain for twenty-two years in a miserable dungeon, till the death of her persecutor, Queen Sophia Amelia. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the naval battle, which took place in Kjöge Bay in 1710, between the Danes and the Swedes, Hvitfeldt’s ship, the Danebrog, took fire. To save the town of Kjöge, and the Danish fleet which were being driven by the wind towards his burning ship he blew up his vessel, with himself and his whole crew. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hans Egede went to Greenland in 1721, and worked there for fifteen long years amid incredible privations and difficulties. He not only spread the Christian religion, but was himself the pattern of a noble Christian. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Once while on a journey to the western coast of Jutland, the king came to the cottage of an old woman. As he was leaving she ran after him, and asked him to write his name on a beam as a remembrance of his visit. The king turned back and complied with her request. Through his whole life he interested himself for the peasantry, and on that account it was that the Danish peasants begged to be allowed to carry the coffin to the royal vault at Roeskilde, four Danish miles from Copenhagen. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the second of April, 1801, occurred the sanguinary naval engagement between the Danes and the English, under Sir Hyde Parker and Nelson. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Astronomical Observatory at Copenhagen. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bertel Thorwaldsen. <a href="holger-danske.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a superstition respecting these elf maidens, that they are only to be looked at in front, and are therefore made hollow, like the inside of a mask. <a href="the-elfin-hill.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In former times, when a ghost appeared, the priest condemned it to enter the earth; when this was done, a stake was driven into the spot to which it had been banished. At midnight a cry was heard, “Let me out!” The stake was then pulled out, and the excommunicated spirit flew away, in the form of a raven, with a hole in its left wing. This ghostlike bird was called the night-raven. <a href="the-elfin-hill.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is a popular superstition in Denmark that a living horse, or a living pig, has been buried under every church that is built. The ghost of the dead horse is supposed to limp upon three legs every night to some house, in which anyone was going to die. The ghost of a pig was called a grave-pig. <a href="the-elfin-hill.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A toy played with by Danish children. It is made from the breastbone of a goose, and is by some wooden contrivance made to jump like a frog. <a href="the-jumpers.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kjöge, a little town on Kjöge Bay. Lifting up children by placing the hands on each side of their heads, is called “showing them Kjöge hens.” <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prästöe, a still smaller town. <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>About a hundred paces from Prästöe lies the estate of Nysöe, where Thorswaldsen usually resided while in Denmark, and where he executed many memorable works. <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wordingburg under King Waldemar was a place of great importance; now it is a very insignificant town: only a lonely tower and the remains of a well show where the castle once stood. <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Corsör, on the Great Belt, used to be called the most tiresome town in Denmark before the establishment of steamers. Travellers had to wait for a favorable wind. The title of “tiresome” was ingeniously added to the Danish escutcheon by a witticism of Vaudeville Heibergs. The poet Baggesen was born here. <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Roeskilde (from Roesquelle, rose-spring, falsely called Rothschild), once the capital of Denmark. The town took its name from King Hroar, and from the numerous springs in the neighbourhood. In its beautiful cathedral most of the kings and queens of Denmark are buried. In Roeskilde the Danish States used to assemble. <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Soröe, a very quite little town in a beautiful situation, surrounded by forests and lakes. Holberg, the Molière of Denmark, founded a noble academy here. The poets Hanck and Jugeman were professors here. Letztern lives there still. <a href="little-tuk.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“I want a voice,” or “I have no voice.” <a href="a-cheerful-temper.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“A humid south wind on the lakes of Switzerland, a fearful storm. <a href="the-ice-maiden.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span>The cat looked out from the miller’s house,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No one was in, not even a mouse!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="the-ice-maiden.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is the custom in Denmark to change houses in April, generally on one particular day of the month, which is therefore called “moving or flitting day.” April is here, therefore, called a “house agent,” as well as the manager of funerals, as the changeable weather in this month is considered very unhealthy. <a href="the-mail-couch-passengers.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Danish sculptor Thorwaldsen. <a href="the-old-church-bell.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
