<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<p>Hans Christian Andersen was born at Odense in Funen on the 2nd of April, 1805. His father was a cobbler, a sensitive, dreamy, fanciful nature with a strong taste for reading and a passion for building castles in the air. Hans Christian was, in these respects, his father’s own child, and his peculiarities, set off as they were by an odd gawkiness and an almost comical ugliness, made the morbidly self-conscious lad a fair butt for his humble comrades, whose natural impulse was to ridicule whatever they could not understand. Fortunately for his own happiness, his self-confidence was always in excess of his shyness, and in his fourteenth year, shortly before being confirmed, he set out to seek his fortune at the capital. Here, for a time, he led a sort of vagabond life, picking up a trifle here and there, as best he could, and sustained by the fixed idea that his universal genius was bound to succeed in the long run. The things he attempted seem almost incredible in these matter-of-fact days. He danced figure dances before the most famous danseuse of the capital, who not unnaturally regarded the queer creature as an escaped lunatic; he sang arias before the director of the Copenhagen Conservatoire, who gave him singing lessons there till his voice broke; he wrote high-flown dramas which were unconscious plagiarisms of Oehlenschläger and Ingemann; he haunted the back-doors of theatres in hopes of being employed as a supernumerary, till, at last, the enlightened and sympathetic Jonas Collin, at that time manager of the Royal Theatre, took pity on him and represented his case to the King, who readily granted him a small pension, and sent him, free of charge, to the Latin School at Slagelse, about 12¼, Danish miles from Copenhagen. The pride of the sensitive hobbledehoy of eighteen must have suffered acutely when he took his place among the little urchins at the bottom of the lowest form at Slagelse School; but he seems to have suffered even more from the sarcasms of the rector, Simon Meisling, whose sense of the ridiculous was never disturbed by any charitable scruples. In 1826 Meisling was transferred to Elsinore, and with him Andersen quitted Slagelse⁠—or Plagelse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> as he preferred to call if; “not merely for the rhyme’s sake,” as he is careful to tell us. He lodged for a time with Meisling at Elsinore, but master and pupil never could hit it off together, and Andersen gladly took advantage of his friend Collin’s offer to remove him to Copenhagen, where his education was privately completed by the theologian Ludwig Christian Müller. It was at Elsinore that Andersen composed his first poem, “The Dying Child,” which, with some others in Heine’s manner, was printed in the celebrated <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Flying Post</i> of Copenhagen. His first important work was the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Fodreise fra Holmens canal til Ostpynten af Amager Aarene, 1828 og 1829</i> (“Tour on Foot from Holm’s Canal to Amager, 1828⁠–⁠29”), a humorously fantastic itinerary, clearly written under the influence of Hoffmann’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Fantasiestücken</i>. Although superficial and pedantic, it is not without a delicate irony and some fine touches of that naïve childlike fancy which was one day to make the young author famous. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Fodreise</i> was received with favour. Even such an Aristarchus as Heiberg wrote it up in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Flying Post</i>. A comic vaudeville, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Kjælighed paa Nicolai Taarn</i> (“Love on Nicholas’ Tower”), which appeared a couple of months later, was also successful. It was a smart parody on the high-flying, heroic dramas of the day and many began to see a future satirist of promise in the young author. But an unhappy love affair at this time, from which he never seems to have quite recovered, turned him aside from the affectation of cynicism which he had borrowed from Heine, and his next work, a collection of poems entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Phantasier og Shizzer</i> (“Fantasies and Sketches”), 1831, was the most natural thing he had yet written It was now too, that he met with his first literay reverse. The great satirist Baggesen, in his famous polemical poem, “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Gjengangeren</span>” (“Spectre”), did not spare even Andersen, and the latter’s irregular, defective prosody and frequent solecisms were hit off in the following stinging lines:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Drunk with the thin small-beer of Fancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mounted on Slagelsian Nancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Muses’ ancient, night-mare hack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With drooping flanks and broken:back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold! Gait Andersen comes riding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom the unlettered mob takes pride in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hold him⁠—their applauses show it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For quite a prophet of a poet!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Such ridicule in the leading critical periodical of the day Andersen never could forget. His morbidly sensitive vanity always saw a deliberate insult, an irreparable calamity in the lightest, the mildest criticism, whilst even the grossest praise from the most incompetent admirers used to raise him into the seventh heaven of rapture. No man moreover was ever a worse judge of his own writings. He always regarded his latest, as his incomparably best work, and the childish enthusiasm with which he raved about his own favourite productions drew down upon him all manner of ridicule, which was so much torture to him. It was well for him that he had such an asylum at this time as the Collins’ house, where he was always treated as a member of the family, and within whose patriarchal walls his sickly fancies and morbid broodings were always met by wise remonstrance or good-humoured badinage. His frequent foreign tours moreover (he was as much a bird of passage as his prime favourite, the Stork) did much to take him out of himself. His first little excursion was made in 1831 to North Germany, and he has left us an account of it in the charming <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Skyggebilder af en Reisen till Harzen</i> (“Silhouettes of a Journey to the Harz”) His second tour (1833), at the expense of the State, took in Germany, France, Switzerland and Italy. At Rome, where he lived on the most friendly terms with his literary opponent Hertz, and in daily intercourse with the Scandinavian artist colony, whose leading spirit was Thorwaldsen, he began his first novel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Improvisatoren</i>, which was published in 1885. The hero, a young Improvisatore who fights his way to the front in the face of adverse circumstances and unjust neglect, is transparently the author himself, and the same may be said of the heroes of the subsequent novels, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>O. T.</abbr></i> (1836) and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Kun en Spillemand</i> 1837 (“Only a Fiddler”). All three romances show Andersen at his best and at his worst. What we may call the scaffolding of the story, the descriptions of nature, the impressions of travel, the humorous episodes, and the fanciful observations of men and things are admirable; but the characterisation is generally feeble and the exalted sensitiveness and omnipresent egotism of the author are disturbing elements.</p>
			<p>A few months after the appearance of <i>Improvisatoren</i>, Andersen had published a little volume of tales for children containing “The Tinderbox,” “Little Claus and Big Claus,” “The Princess on the Pea” and “Little Ida’s Flowers,” which was to be the foundation of his future fame. “After a long fumbling about,” a great critic has finely said,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> “after many years of aimless wandering.⁠ ⁠… Andersen found himself standing, one evening, outside a little unpretentious but mysterious door, the door of Fairy-Tale; he touched it, it flew open, and he saw, sparkling inside there in the darkness, the little tinderbox which was to be his Aladdin’s lamp. He struck fire with it and the Spirits of the Lamp⁠—the dogs with the eyes like teacups, like mill-wheels, and like the Round Tower⁠—stood by him and brought him the three huge chests full of all the fairy copper money, silver money and gold money. The first fairy tale was there and it drew all the others after it. Happy the man who finds his right tinderbox!”</p>
			<p>“I have begun upon some tales as told to children,” wrote Andersen on this occasion to a friend, “and I fancy I have succeeded. I have given [the public] a copy of the fairy tales which used to please me when I was little and which are not known, I think. I have written them just as if I were telling them to a child.” It is remarkable that Andersen should from the very first have so closely set before him what was to be the essential peculiarity of his fairy tales distinguishing them sharply from all others. All previous fairy tales had been <em>written for</em> children, his were <em>told</em> to them. His tales appealed directly to the childish fancy, they accommodated themselves absolutely to the child’s point of view, to that faculty of childhood which animates and personifies everything in nature. That this was the right way to tell a fairy-Tale there can be no doubt, but its very novelty struck the public at first as odd and eccentric. People thought them rather childish than childlike⁠—“<i xml:lang="fr">un peu trop enfantin</i>,” perhaps, as Professor Brandes’ young Frenchman considered them⁠—and so far as they were noticed by the press at all, they were noticed unfavourably. Only a single eye saw more deeply into the matter, but that eye happened to be the clearest in Denmark. Hans Christian Örsted assured Andersen that while the <i>Improvisatoren</i> would make him famous, the fairy tales would make him immortal. “They are,” said Örsted, “the most perfect things you have yet written.” The readily impressionable Andersen, however, was at first rather inclined to believe the verdict of the Public. He regarded “the little fairy tales,” he said, as “a juggler’s sleight of hand with Fancy’s golden apples.” He meant to make his reputation by “greater works.” The first modest collection of fairy tales was, nevertheless regularly followed by subsequent little companion volumes, the public gradually got to like them, and its respect for them increased vastly when the actors at the Royal Theatre condescended to recite them from the stage.</p>
			<p>These “greater works” which chiefly occupied Andersen at the time of the appearance of the first fairy tales were, besides the novels already mentioned, the romantic drama, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Mulatto</i> and the tragedy <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Moorish Girl</i> (1840), both of which were applauded indeed by playgoers, but fiercely assailed by the critics. Heiberg in his Aristophanic comedy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Soul After Death</i>, placed both plays in the repertoire of Triviality in Hell, and his satiric lash drove the smarting dramatist away from Denmark again. This time Andersen visited Germany, Italy, Greece, Turkey and Hungary, subsequently describing his impressions in the exquisite little collection of tales and sketches <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">En Digters Bazar</i> (“A Poet’s Bazar”), 1842. Fresh tours to Paris and North Germany quickly followed, while in the summertime, Andersen usually stayed, a welcome guest, at the country houses of the gentry in Zealand and Funen. He was also frequently a guest of King Christian <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> at Föhr. In 1846 he produced his one good comedy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="da">Den nye Barselstue</i> (The New Lying-in Room”), in Holberg’s vein, which appeared anonymously and was enthusiastically applauded by critics and public alike. Much less successful were his epic poem <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ashuerus</i>, an aphoristic series of historical tableaux from the birth of Christ to the discovery of America (1848), and his romance, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Two Baronesses</i> (1849). From 1850 to the end of his life Andersen was constantly on the move, scouring Europe from north to south and from east to west, venturing even to Barbary, and only prevented from accepting an invitation to America for fear of crossing the ocean, especially as a dear lady friend of his had predicted his death on the other side under mysteriously terrifying circumstances.</p>
			<p>Andersen celebrated his fiftieth birthday by publishing (1855) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">Mit Livs Eventyr</i> (“The Story of My Life”), perhaps the most subjective autobiography ever written. This work, with its subsequent supplements and his correspondence, edited three years after his death by Bille and Bögh, are the documents upon which his future biographer (for he has not yet found one) must mainly depend. In the latter years of his life, Andersen dabbled in metaphysics to the decided detriment of his literary reputation. The last and worst of his novels, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="da">At vœre eller ikke vœre</i> (“To Be or Not to Be”), is an ambitious attempt to combat the materialistic view of life and “reconcile Nature and the Bible.” Andersen, with his usual enthusiasm for his latest production, confidently expected that this work would completely revolutionise modern thought, but it fell flat. Some of the later fairy tales also suffer slightly from the author’s well-meaning but mistaken efforts to settle the most difficult problems of life on purely speculative grounds.</p>
			<p>In 1875, on the occasion of Andersen’s seventieth birthday, his beautiful “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.short-story">Story of a Mother</span>” was published in fifteen languages at Copenhagen. Andersen was now as full of honours as of years. All his youthful ambitions had been more than gratified. He had a distinguished title and no end of orders of knighthood, both native and foreign; he was the personal friend of his sovereign and the darling of the people; he had obtained the freedom of his native city, and finally had the unusual but not unpleasant experience of sitting for the statue which was to be raised to him in the capital. His joy on this occasion was, however, considerably dashed because the sculptor had, in the first instance, represented him surrounded by a group of listening children against which appendage he protested with whimsical but characteristic vehemence. “Not one of the sculptors,” he complains, “seems to know that I never <em>could</em> tell tales whenever anyone is sitting behind me, or close up to me, still less when I have children in my lap, or on my back, or young Copenhageners leaning right against me. To call me ‘the children’s poet’ is a mere figure of speech. My aim has always been to be the poet of elder people of all sorts: children alone cannot represent me.” Nevertheless it is as the children’s poet that Andersen has now his truest and most enduring fame. His dramatic works are forgotten; his poems are unimportant; his novels never read; but his fairy tales will live as long as there is such a thing as Literature at all. Andersen died on the 4th August, 1875, at his country house, “Rolighed,” near Copenhagen, surrounded by loving and sorrowing friends. Despite his weaknesses and peculiarities he was beloved as few none been.</p>
			<p>The ideal translation of the fairy tales is Victor Rydberg’s monumental version, but that it should be so, was, apart from the peculiar genius of the translator, only to be expected considering that the idioms of the two Scandinavian languages are almost identical. Some of the German translations are also very good. In no country, however, is Andersen so well known and so highly appreciated as in England, though here, unfortunately, he has not been very happy in his translators. Omitting school editions and minor selections, there are, roughly speaking, ten English versions and of these (taking them, as far as possible, by order of merit) the earliest is still, on the whole and as far as it goes, the best. We allude, of course, to the ten tales translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Howitt (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wonderful Tales</i>, 1846). <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Howitt’s Danish is miserably faulty; occasionally she commits blunders which would be the ruin of the average translator nowadays;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> but nobody ever caught the <em>spirit</em> of Andersen as she has done; she is both loyally literal and fearlessly free as occasion demands; while her masterly rendering of those extremely difficult nonsense rhymes in “Ole Luköie” beginning: “<i xml:lang="da">Vor Sang skall komme som en Vi</i>,” is an unapproachable model for all future translators. Another excellent minor collection (it consists of but <em>eight</em> of the best stories) is the beautifully printed and gorgeously illustrated <abbr>4to</abbr> of 1872 (Sampson Low), by <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">H. L. D.</abbr> Ward and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Plesner. Their knowledge of Danish, though not always above reproach, is more thorough than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Howitt’s; but their English, though very good, is somewhat tawdry beside hers, and, where comparison is possible, we in nine cases out of ten prefer the language of the modest little <abbr>16mo</abbr> of 1846 to the language of its magnificent successor. By far the ablest of the larger collections is certainly Madame de Chatelain’s translation (Routledge, 1852). This lady, who had considerable experience as a translator, is scrupulously exact and painstaking; her English too, is pure and simple, and her knowledge of Danish much more intimate than that of any other of Andersen’s translators. All the remaining English versions of Andersen are distinctly inferior to the first three. Least irritating, perhaps, are the numerous and well-known versions of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dulcken, to whom the British public owes its first <em>complete</em> Andersen. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dulecken evidently knows Danish very well, though his slavish literalness constantly reminds us of the fact that we are reading a translation. His English also leaves very much to be desired. Still less can we commend the English of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sievert’s version (Sampson Low, 1887). Even when accurate (and he is generally accurate) he repeatedly vulgarises his original, and not infrequently both garbles the more difficult and debases the more beautiful passages. I am also inclined to think, from internal evidence, that he owes something to Rydberg’s Swedish version. Of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paull’s version (Warne, 1882) we can only say that it is feebly accurate and wildly slipshod. The humour of Andersen, always his strong point, is frequently missed altogether; but the translator compensates us somewhat by an unconscious humour of her own, especially remarkable in her notes, which reveal a perfect genius for blundering. The numerous anonymous versions published by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Ward, Lock and <abbr>Co.</abbr> are fairly correct, but their English is, generally speaking, wooden and wayward. Nevertheless they are preferable to the translations (1846, 1852, Bohn) for which Miss Peachey is responsible. Other translators may misunderstand and therefore misinterpret their Andersen: Miss Peachey presumes to beautify and even bowdlerise him. In “The Tinderbox,” the dog that had the gold is expanded into “the monstrous guardian of the golden treasure.” The soldier, who, by the way, puts up not at an inn, but at a <em>hotel</em>, is so modest that he “kneels down and kisses the Princess’s <em>hand</em>.” This will be news to Andersen’s admirers. We remember that the Queen, in the same story, is described as a wise woman who “could do something more than ride in a coach.” Miss Peachey is careful to add, “and look very grand and condescending.” Four adjectives suffice Andersen for describing the little match-girl’s grandmother: Miss Peachey requires three sentences. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wehnert, however (Bell, 1869), is still more presumptuous, for his fondness for big words goes hand-in-hand with a perfect mania for moralising. Andersen himself would scarcely recognise “The Wild Swans” when it emerges from beneath <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wehnert’s deforming pen. The heroine, poor Elisa, to take but a few instances, leans against the stump of a tree “<em>which in all probability had been destroyed by lightning</em>.” When she plaits her hair it is “<em>simply but prettily</em>.” When her elder brother tells her they must all fly away on the morrow, “<em>the other ten confirmed these words with evident emotion</em>.” Elisa puts her trust not in “God” but in “the <em>Ruler of the destinies of man</em>”⁠—all the italicised words being of course gratuitous embellishments of the translator. The <i xml:lang="fr">ne plus ultra</i> of pretentious pedantry, however, is reached by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gardiner (Heywood, 1889), who takes unheard-of liberties with his text; devotes a note of ten lines to prove that the boots which the old Court lady in “The Tinderbox” wore were goloshes, and substitutes the name Ludvig for that of Hjalmar in “Ole Luköe,” “as conveying the general idea of the original; and also because a foreign name better suits the spirit of the story.”</p>
			<p>It seems strange at first sight, that most of the English versions of Andersen should be so inadequate, for Andersen is, on the whole, anything but a difficult writer. We may go further, and say that no writer of equal genius can bear to be so literally translated into English as he. His meaning is, generally, transparently obvious and his Danish is perfectly simple and straightforward. It is never paradoxical like Kiekegaard’s, or elusively subtle like Jacobsen’s, or obscurely concentrated like Ibsen’s and Björnson’s. How is it then that he has fared so ill at the hands of his English translators? The reason seems to me a want of reverence on their part, a feeling that he was, after all, a mere teller of fairy tales, of trifles which might be Englished anyhow and by anybody. Translators who approach the great Dane in such a profane spirit are bound to fail. They have no sense for the quaint conceits, the delicate nuances, the childlike naivete and the lightsome birdlike humour which are of the very essence of his simple but unique art. They must become children again themselves before they can hope to understand him.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Nisbet Bain</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
