<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Snail and the Rose-Tree.</h2>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_182">[182]</a></span></div><div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_183">[183]</a></span>A hedge of hazel-nut bushes encircled the garden; without was field
and meadow, with cows and sheep; but in the centre of the garden stood
a rose-tree, and under it sat a snail—she had much within her, she
had herself.</p>
<p>"Wait, until my time comes," said she, "I shall accomplish something
more than putting forth roses, bearing nuts, or giving milk, like the
cows and sheep!"</p>
<p>"I expect something fearfully grand," said the rose-tree, "may I ask
when it will take place?"</p>
<p>"I shall take my time," said the snail, "you are in too great a hurry,
and when <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_184">[184]</a></span>this is the case, how can one's expectations be fulfilled?"</p>
<p>The next year the snail lay in about the same spot under the
rose-tree, which put forth buds and developed roses, ever fresh, ever
new. The snail half crept forth, stretched out its feelers and drew
itself in again.</p>
<p>"Everything looks as it did a year ago! No progress has been made; the
rose-tree still bears roses; it does not get along any farther!"</p>
<p>The summer faded away, the autumn passed, the rose-tree constantly
bore flowers and buds, until the snow fell, and the weather was raw
and damp. The rose-tree bent itself towards the earth, the snail crept
in the earth.</p>
<p>A new year commenced; the roses came out, and the snail came out.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_185">[185]</a></span>"Now you are an old rose bush," said the snail, "you will soon die
away. You have given the world everything that you had in you; whether
that be much or little is a question, upon which I have not time to
reflect. But it is quite evident, that you have not done the slightest
thing towards your inward developement; otherwise I suppose that
something different would have sprung from you. Can you answer this?
You will soon be nothing but a stick! Can you understand what I say?"</p>
<p>"You startle me," said the rose-tree, "I have never thought upon
that!"</p>
<p>"No, I suppose that you have never meddled much with thinking! Can you
tell me why you blossom? And how it comes to pass? How? Why?"</p>
<p>"No," said the rose-tree, "I blossom <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_186">[186]</a></span>with pleasure because I could
not do otherwise. The sun was so warm, the air so refreshing, I drank
the clear dew and the fortifying rain; I breathed, I lived! A strength
came to me from the earth, a strength came from above, I felt a
happiness, ever new, ever great and therefore I must blossom ever,
that was my life, I could not do otherwise!"</p>
<p>"You have led a very easy life!" said the snail.</p>
<p>"Certainly, everything has been given to me," said the rose-tree, "but
still more has been given to you. You are one of those meditative,
pensive, profound natures, one of the highly gifted, that astound the
whole world!"</p>
<p>"I have assuredly no such thought in my mind," said the snail, "the
world is nothing to me! What have I to do with <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_187">[187]</a></span>the world? I have
enough with myself, and enough in myself!"</p>
<p>"But should we not all, here on earth, give the best part of us to
others? Offer what we can!—It is true, that I have only given
roses—but you? You who have received so much, what have you given to
the world? What do you give her?"</p>
<p>"What I have given? What I give? I spit upon her! She is good for
nothing! I have nought to do with her. Put forth roses, you can do no
more! Let the hazel bushes bear nuts! Let the cows and sheep give
milk; they have each their public, I have mine within myself! I retire
within myself, and there I remain. The world is nothing to me!"</p>
<p>And thereupon the snail withdrew into her house and closed it.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_188">[188]</a></span>"That is so sad," said the rose-tree, "with the best will, I cannot
creep in, I must ever spring out, spring forth in roses. The leaves
drop off and are blown away by the wind. Yet, I saw one of the roses
laid in the hymn-book of the mother of the family; one of my roses was
placed upon the breast of a charming young girl, and one was kissed
with joy by a child's mouth. This did me so much good, it was a real
blessing! That is my recollection, my life!"</p>
<p>And the rose-tree flowered in innocence, and the snail sat
indifferently in her house. The world was nothing to her.</p>
<p>And years passed away. The snail became earth to earth and the
rose-tree became earth to earth; the remembrances in the hymn-book
were also blown away—but new rose-trees bloomed in the garden, <span class="pagenum"><a id="Page_189">[189]</a></span>new
snails grew in the garden; they crept in their houses and spat.—The
world is nothing to them.</p>
<p>Shall we read the story of the past again? It will not be different.</p>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<hr/>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<div class="tr">
<p class="cen"><a id="TN"/>Typographical errors corrected in text:</p>
<br/>
Page 104:   succeded replaced with succeeded<br/>
Page 116:   petulent replaced with petulant<br/>
Page 144:   prefered replaced with preferred<br/>
Page 167:   'were' capitalized to 'Were' (new sentence)<br/>
Page 170:   ordonation replaced with ordination<br/>
Page 174:   beckens replaced with beckons<br/>
</div>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<hr/>
<div class="pg_body_wrapper"><br/></div>
<pre/></body>
</html>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
