<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-wicked-prince" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>The Wicked Prince</h3>
			<p>There was once a wicked and overweening Prince, whose whole mind was bent upon winning all the countries of the world and striking terror with his name. Fire and sword marked his onward progress; his soldiers trod down the corn in the fields, they set fire to the peasants’ huts, so that the red flames licked the leaves from the trees, and the baked fruit hung on the black and charred branches. Many a wretched mother hid herself behind the reeking wall with her naked suckling at her breast, and the soldiers sought after her, and if they found her and her child, then their devilish joy first began⁠—evil spirits could not have done worse. But to the Prince’s mind all this was just as it should be. Day by day his power increased, his name was universally feared, and fortune followed him in all his doings. He drew gold and vast treasures from the conquered towns; and wealth, the like of which was not to be found in any other place, was amassed in his capital. And now he built him splendid palaces, churches, and triumphal arches, and everyone who saw these glories said “What a great Prince!” They never thought of the distress he had brought upon other lands; they did not hear the weeping and wailing which rose up from the devastated cities.</p>
			<p>The Prince looked at his gold, looked at his splendid edifices, and then thought, as the majority of men thought, “What a great Prince I am! But I must have more, much more! It must never be said that any other power is greater than mine, or even as great,” and he went to war with all his neighbours, and conquered them all. He chained the vanquished kings to his car with chains of gold, and so made them drag him through the streets whenever he would take a drive; and when he sat at table they had to lie down at his feet, and at the feet of his courtiers, and pick up the crumbs of bread which were thrown to them.</p>
			<p>And now this Prince had his statue set up in the marketplaces, and in the royal palace⁠—nay, he would have had it placed in the churches, before the very altar of the Lord, but the priests said, “O Prince! thou art great; but God is greater still. We dare not do it!”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said that evil Prince, “then I will overcome God likewise!” and in the pride and haughtiness of his heart he built him a most cunning ship wherewith he would navigate the air; it was as variegated as the neck of the peacock, and seemed to be starred with a thousand eyes, but every eye was a gun-barrel. The Prince sat in the midst of this ship, he had only to press a spring and a thousand bullets flew out, whereupon the barrels were immediately loaded again as before. Hundreds of strong eagles were harnessed to this ship, and then away he flew towards the sun. The earth lay far below him; at first it looked, with all its mountains and forests, merely like a ploughed-up field, where the green patches peep up from the midst of the overturned turf; then it resembled a flat chart, and soon it was lost altogether in clouds and mist. Higher and higher flew the eagles. Then God sent forth a single one of his countless angels, and the wicked Prince discharged a thousand bullets at him. But the bullets fell back like spent hailstones from the angel’s shining wings. One drop of blood, only one solitary drop, dripped down from the white feathers, and that drop fell upon the ship wherein the Prince sat. It was like a burning flame, and it weighed as heavily as a thousand tons of lead, and bore the ship down towards the earth with it at a breakneck pace. The strong wings of the eagles were snapped; the wind whizzed around the Prince’s head, and the clouds round about (formed doubtless from the cities he had burnt) took threatening shapes, like crabs, miles long, which stretched out their strong claws after him, or like rolling masses of rocks or fire-belching dragons. Half dead the Prince lay in the ship, which at last remained suspended between the thick branches of the forest.</p>
			<p>“I will vanquish God!” cried he. “I have sworn it⁠—my will is law!” and he took seven years to build a most cunning ship to navigate the air with. He had thunderbolts forged of the hardest steel, for he would storm the fortresses of Heaven. He got together a vast host from all his domains, and when they stood side by side in battle array, they covered a circuit of many miles. They mounted the cunningly-devised ship, and the King himself was about to take his seat therein, when God sent forth a swarm of gnats, a single little swarm of gnats, which buzzed about the King and stung his hands and face. In his rage he drew his sword, but only beat the empty air, the gnats he could not touch. Then he commanded that costly carpets should be brought thither, and these they were to wrap around him, so that no midge could pierce through them with its sting; and they did as he commanded. But one little midge made its way into the innermost carpet, crept into the King’s ear, and stung him there. It burnt like fire, the venom flew to his brain; he broke loose from the ship, tore off all the carpets, rent his clothes asunder, and danced all naked in the midst of his coarse and savage soldiers, who now mocked at the mad Prince who would fain have stormed the courts of God Himself, and was immediately overcome by a single little midge.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
